Dhaka (/ˈdɑːkə/ DAH-kə or /ˈdækə/ DAK-ə, Bengali: [ˈɖʱaka]), formerly known as Dacca,[10] is the capital and the largest city of Bangladesh. 
It is the ninth-largest and the sixth-most densely populated city in the world, with a population of 8.9 million residents within the city limits, 
and a population of over 21 million residents in the Greater Dhaka Area. Dhaka is the economic, political and cultural center of Bangladesh. 
It is one of the major cities of South Asia, the largest city in Eastern South Asia and among the Bay of Bengal countries; and one of the largest
 cities among OIC countries. As part of the Bengal plain, the city is bounded by the Buriganga River, Turag River, Dhaleshwari River and Shitalakshya River.
 The city is located in an eponymous district and division.

The area of Dhaka has been inhabited since the first millennium. The city rose to prominence in the 17th century as a provincial capital and commercial center
 of the Mughal Empire. Dhaka was the capital of the proto-industrialised Mughal Bengal for 75 years (1608–39 and 1660–1704). As the center of the muslin trade 
in Bengal, it was one of the most prosperous cities on the Indian subcontinent. The medieval city was named Jahangirabad in honor of the Mughal Emperor Jahangir
 and hosted the seat of the Mughal Subahdar, Naib Nazims and Dewans. Medieval Dhaka's glory peaked in the 17th and 18th centuries, when it was home to merchants
 from across Eurasia. It was the centre of a flourishing sea trade attracting European traders. The Mughals decorated the city with well-laid out gardens, tombs,
 mosques, palaces and forts. 

The city was once called the Venice of the East.[11] Under British rule, the city saw the introduction of electricity, railways, cinemas, Western-style universities 
and colleges and a modern water supply. It became an important administrative and educational center in Eastern Bengal and Assam after 1905.[12] In 1947, after the end
 of British rule, the city became the administrative capital of East Pakistan. It was declared as the legislative capital of Pakistan in 1962. In 1971, after the Liberation
 War, it became the capital of an independent Bangladesh.

Dhaka is the financial, commercial and the entertainment capital of Bangladesh, and accounts for up to 35% of Bangladesh's economy.[13] Since its establishment as a modern 
capital city the population, area, social and economic diversity of Dhaka have grown tremendously, the city is now one of the most densely industrialized regions in Bangladesh. 
Dhaka is a major beta-global city,[14] as it hosts the headquarters of several international corporations. By the 21st century, it emerged as a megacity. The Dhaka Stock Exchange 
has over 750 listed companies. The city hosts over 50 diplomatic missions and the headquarters of BIMSTEC. The city's culture is known for its cycle-rickshaws, cuisine, art festivals 
and religious diversity. The old city is home to around 2000 buildings from the Mughal and British periods, including notable structures such as the Bara Katra and Choto Katra 
caravansaries.